---
id: consensus
title: ''
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

# Consensus

EnReach introduces a novel protocol to provide guarantee consensus and staking mechanism, named **GPoS**(**Guarantee Proof of Stake**) .

### Overview

The **GPoS** (**Guarantee Proof of Stake**) protocol integrates resource validation from GPoW (Guarantee Proof of Work) and ensures network-wide consensus through a decentralized network of specialized nodes called **Keepers**. Unlike traditional PoS mechanisms, GPoS introduces a guarantee-based staking model where the staking capacity of Keeper nodes is directly tied to their ability to validate and process workload proofs from edge nodes.

### Role of Keeper Nodes

In GPoS, **Keeper nodes** play a crucial role in validating, verifying, and quantifying the workload proofs generated by edge nodes through GPoW. These Keeper nodes act as intermediaries that ensure the integrity and accuracy of the submitted proofs, thereby maintaining the network's trust and reliability.

**Key Responsibilities of Keeper Nodes:**

* **Workload Proof Validation:** Keeper nodes are responsible for verifying the GPoW proofs submitted by various edge nodes, including CDN endpoints, GPU compute nodes, storage providers, etc.
* **Consensus Participation:** After validating the proofs, Keeper nodes collaborate to reach consensus on the legitimacy of the workload proofs. This ensures that only verified contributions are rewarded, and fraudulent activities are identified.
* **Staking and Guarantee:** Keeper nodes must stake tokens as collateral, which act as a guarantee for the quality and reliability of their validation work. The staking capacity is directly linked to the maximum workload the Keeper node can handle, as determined by the total GPoW-verified resources it oversees.

### Staking Model and Guarantee Mechanism

The GPoS mechanism introduces a unique **Guarantee-based Staking Model**, where the stake amount is tied to the Keeper node's capacity to process and validate edge nodes' workloads. This model ensures a direct correlation between the Keeper's stake and its capacity to guarantee the accuracy of the proofs it verifies.

**Key Features of the Staking Model:**

* **Dynamic Stake Cap:** Unlike traditional PoS, where nodes can stake unlimited tokens or a fixed cap tokens, GPoS enforces a dynamic staking cap. The cap is determined by the Keeper's workload capacity, calculated based on the volume and complexity of the workload proofs it is capable to validate.
* **Risk and Reward Mechanism:**
  * **Rewards:** Keeper nodes earn rewards proportional to their validated workload and stake. The rewards are distributed based on the quality and quantity of verified workload proofs, incentivizing accurate and efficient validation.
  * **Slashing Mechanism:** If a Keeper node fails to properly validate workload proofs, or if it engages in fraudulent activities such as approving invalid or fake proofs, it is penalized through a slashing mechanism. The staked tokens are partially or fully forfeited depending on the severity of the offense, ensuring accountability and deterring malicious behavior.

### Validation and Consensus Process

The GPoS validation process consists of several steps to ensure robust consensus on workload proofs:

* **Proof Submission:** Edge nodes submit their workload proofs, verified by GPoW mechanisms, to the Keeper nodes.
* **Initial Validation:** Each Keeper node performs an initial validation, checking the authenticity and correctness of the proofs using cryptographic techniques such as TEE attestations and Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs).
* **Cross-Validation and Consensus:** Keeper nodes engage in a cross-validation process, where multiple Keeper nodes review the same set of proofs. The network uses a consensus protocol to reach an agreement on the validity of the workload proofs.
* **On-Chain Settlement:** After consensus is reached, the validated proofs are recorded on-chain through smart contracts. Rewards are then distributed to edge nodes based on their verified contributions, and Keeper nodes receive a share of the rewards for their validation services.

### Scalability and Security

The GPoS mechanism addresses scalability and security concerns through its structured approach:

* **Scalability:** By linking the staking capacity of Keepers nodes to their workload capacity, GPoS dynamically scales with the network's growth. As the number of edge nodes increases, the number of Keeper nodes and their staking capacity can also expand, ensuring consistent validation performance.
* **Security:** The integration of TEE, ZKPs, and a robust slashing mechanism ensures a high level of security. The dynamic stake cap prevents concentration of stake and power, reducing the risk of centralization and malicious attacks. Additionally, the rigorous on-chain consensus process prevents fraudulent workload validation.

### Conclusion

GPoS (Guarantee Proof of Stake) forms the trust and incentive layer of the EnReach network, enabling transparent, secure, and efficient validation of decentralized resources. It offers an advanced consensus and staking model that aligns the stake of Keeper nodes with their validation capacity.&#x20;

By linking staking limits to workload handling capacity and implementing a strong slashing mechanism, GPoS ensures that the EnReach network maintains high standards of security, reliability, and decentralization. This innovative approach sets a new benchmark for staking mechanisms in DePIN networks, facilitating efficient and trustworthy decentralized service delivery.
